GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH  
ABSTRACT  
  
Budget Estimates 2025-26 – Comprehensive instructions for the preparation of  Budget 
Estimates & Revised Estimates and online submission  –Issued.  
--------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ---------------  
FINANCE (BUDGET-I) DEPARTMENT  
  
G.O.MS.No. 3       Dated: 08-01-2025  
  
ORDER:  
  
The Annual Budget of the State Government for the F Y 2025-26, will be presented to the 
Legislature during the month of February/March of t he current financial year & the process of 
preparation of the Budget Estimates for 2025-26 has to be completed by end-January 2025.  
  
2.         The Heads of Departments & other Estimat ing Officers have to prepare & submit the 
Budget Estimates for FY 2025-26, as per Para 13.19. 1 of A.P. Budget Manual and as per the 
instructions given in this order.  
  
3.         The proposal for the Budget Estimates 2025-26 is to be furnished online through 
https://nidhi.apcfss.in . The Estimating officer shall furnish proposals fo r Revised Estimates for 
2024-25, and Budget Estimates for 2025-26, under al l the categories of Heads. The controlling 
officers can access https://nidhi.apcfss.in with the username and password provided by the 
Finance Department  
  
4.         REVISED ESTIMATES (R.E.) 2024-25  
I. The R.E. 2024-25 is to be prepared, as realisticall y as possible, & with reference to the 
following principles, instead of repeating the prev ious year’s budget figures in a routine 
way. 
a. progress of expenditure during first (9) nine month s of current financial year;  
b. expenditure likely to be incurred during the remain ing months;  
c. additional funds proposed to be obtained as supplem entary grants;  
d. re-appropriation or resumption of funds already mad e or proposed;  
e. new head of account sanctioned during the current f inancial year for booking 
expenditure on new schemes; accommodating any adjus tments; opened while 
distributing the existing lump sum provisions; &  
f. any other factor having material effect on expendit ure during current financial 
year.  
II. In short, the revised estimates should represent th e anticipated final expenditure of the 
current year, with reference to all relevant post-b udget developments, and should closely 
correspond to the actual expenditure. 
III. As the closing balance of the year is calculated wi th reference to the revised estimates, 
any significant variation between the revised estim ates and the actual expenditure would upset the Ways and Means forecasts. Therefore, this  exercise should be meticulously 
done. 
IV. The R.E. 2024-25 in the aggregate, should not norma lly exceed the Budget Estimates 
2024-25.  
5.         BUDGET ESTIMATES 2025-26  
I.  All HoDs and Estimating Officers should personally ensure that estimates are prepared 
with utmost care, taking into account all aspects t hat are normally available at the time of 
estimation, so as to avoid huge variations between the estimates & actuals.  
II.  The variations between R.E. for 2024-25 and B.E. fo r 2025-26 should be clearly & 
precisely explained in the remarks column, otherwis e, any proposed increase will not be 
considered.  
III.  The following factors should be considered, while p reparing the B.E. 2025-26  
a. requirements to be assessed with reference to all t he available data;  
b. key consideration should be Actuals of previous yea r & R.E. of current year.  
c. amount proposed for each program/scheme/function/et c. to be calculated as accurately as 
possible, to avoid both excessive & inadequate prov isioning. 
d. corresponding reduction to be made, if the current year estimates provide for non- 
recurring items of expenditure.  
  
6.   ESTIMATES for RECEIPTS :  
I. Tax Revenue  
a. The assumptions of Tax Revenue Receipts are to be b ased on current rates of taxation, 
duties imposed, and fees levied under relevant Acts .  
b. While revising the estimates for the current year o ver the assumptions envisaged earlier, 
the Estimating Officers should account for the rele vant factors such as target fixed, 
progress of actuals & anticipated additional yield from measures of enhancement of 
existing taxes, the estimated loss of revenue accou nt of abolition or reduction of taxes.  
c. The Budget Estimates for the next F.Y. should not b e merely a repetition of the R.E. for 
the current year but should account for all relevan t factors viz. arrears to be collected, 
assumption of a reasonable higher growth rate in re spect of tax revenue & previous year’s 
performance.  
d. HoDs to also indicate the measures proposed to augm ent resources.  
II.  Non Tax Revenue  
a. The Non Tax revenue as a percentage of revenue rece ipts is declining over past several 
years. The major reason for the stagnation is lack of regular & periodic monitoring by the 
administrative departments and the non-revision of charges periodically.  
b. Determined efforts are to be made to increase colle ctions over the present levels. c. All departments should conduct a thorough review of  all the sources and initiate a 
concrete action plan before submitting the estimate s.  
d. Similarly, efforts are to be made to collect intere st receipts, dividends from various 
Public Undertakings, Autonomous Institutions and ot her departmental loans based on the 
terms and conditions of the loans.  
e. Based on the above, the departments should furnish realistic information for inclusion of 
estimates in Budget.  
f. There should be a robust monitoring mechanism in th e administrative departments for 
achieving the targeted Estimates. 
III.  Collection of Arrears:  
  The HoDs to launch a vigorous drive for collection of arrears, as resources have to be raised 
for financing the Budget, the committed expenditure  of earlier plan period, the administrative 
expenditure & expenditure on natural Calamities, la w and order & social welfare measures. 
IV.   Preparation of Receipts Statements  
a. The Receipts data to be presented in Proforma–R.  
b. HoDs to enter required details in the on- line form s provided.  
c. The on-line forms come with pre-populated data, to the extent of the related receipts data 
available with Finance Department.  
d. HoDs to verify the pre-populated data and make corr ections where necessary and submit 
the forms. In case, the data is not pre-populated, the HoDs have to enter the data 
concerned.  
e. The on-line forms have provisions to capture the re ceipts details against all the relevant 
Heads of Accounts.  
f. If the online forms do not reflect the HoAs for any  of the receipt types or require 
modification in description, etc., they shall immed iately approach Finance (Budget) Dept 
for incorporating necessary changes.  
g. HoDs shall ensure that proper projections are made against all receipt HoAs with 
appropriate descriptions.  
h. After submission of on-line forms by the HoDs, the Secretaries concerned shall scrutinize 
and certify the Receipts Statements on-line.  
V.   The budget estimates for receipts should be prepar ed based on the existing rates of taxes, 
duties and fees, etc. and no increase or reduction in such rates which has not been 
sanctioned by the government should be proposed.   
VI.   In addition, arrears of collections which are like ly to be collected in the current year are also 
to be projected.   
VII.   All the HoDs may explore new base for improving th eir receipts and curb the leakages from 
bottom to top level by strict vigilance and improve  the performance of the employees by 
fixing required personal performance indicators at each level.  
  
7.     ESTIMATES for EXPENDITURE:    
7(A). Estimates for Administrative Expenditure:  
  
The Administrative Expenditure Statements includes the following on-line forms & the 
HoD / Drawing and Disbursing Officers should access  the Administrative Expenses tile.  
a. Details of Office Buildings: to capture budget for DH 140- Rents, Rates and Taxes and 
SDH 141- Rents, Rates and Taxes. 
b. Details of Hired Vehicles: to capture budget for DH  130- Office Expenses and SDH 134-
Hiring of Private Vehicles. 
c. Details of the Government Vehicles: to capture budg et for DH- SDH 240- Petrol, Oil and 
Lubricants – 241-Charges towards Office Vehicles & DH-SDH 510- Motor Vehicles – 
511- Maintenance of Motor Vehicles. 
i. Details of the items of expenditure included & actu als for the past three years 
in respect of each item to be furnished. In case ar rears are included, the 
detailed reasons together with figures to be furnis hed.  
ii. DDOs/HODs to take care to ensure that utility charg es are calculated as per 
latest rates & adequate provision is made to meet p ending/future liabilities.  
iii. Motor vehicle purchase to be supported with sanctio n order from government 
& maintenance of motor vehicles to be supported by statement from the HoD.  
iv. “130/134 - Hiring of Private Vehicles”:  The provision shall be made only 
w.r.t. the sanction order & up to the permitted per iod. 
v. Purchase of Motor Vehicles:  Total ban is imposed on the purchase of new 
vehicles, hence make provision only after getting a pproval from the 
competent authority. 
  
7(B): Estimates for Schemes Expenditure:   
I. The process involved in preparation of the Schemes Expenditure Statements is as below.  
a. HoDs to enter required details in on-line forms pro vided.  
b. The on-line forms have pre-populated data, to the e xtent of available expenditure data 
with Finance Department.  
c. HoDs to verify the pre-populated data, make correct ions as necessary & submit the 
forms. In case, where the data is not pre-populated , the HoDs have to enter the data.  
d. The on-line forms capture data regarding Manifesto Schemes, Centrally Assisted State 
Development Schemes (CASDs), Externally Aided Proje cts (EAP), NABARD Projects 
& State Development Schemes (SDSs).  
e. After online submission by the HoDs, the Secretarie s shall scrutinize & certify the data 
on-line. 
II. HoDs shall ensure that the CASP schemes are dovetai led with priorities of Government. 
The key activities for which CASP schemes will be u tilized shall be clearly mentioned 
while submitting the proposals.  III. Prior concurrence of Finance Department is necessar y for submitting the proposals to 
Government of India under CASP schemes.  
IV. For CASP schemes dovetailed with State Schemes, the  department to have a clear action 
plan to demarcate the beneficiaries chargeable to C ASDs and related SDS.  
V. HoDs shall review eligibility & financial assistanc e under welfare schemes, technical 
assistance schemes, operation & maintenance costs d evelopmental economic support 
programs, etc. & aim to bring about greater efficie ncy in deployment of optimum 
resources & more effective coverage to achieve targ eted outputs and outcomes.  
VI. Provision for CSS schemes should be based on the la st year’s actual release to the State 
or the approved action plan whichever is lower, and  not on hypothetical figures. In such 
cases, it is necessary to indicate specifically whe ther the entire amount or only a part of 
the amount is reimbursable from these agencies and whether this amount has been taken 
credit in their estimates of Revenue.  
VII. To avoid inconvenience & to ensure timely payments to employees in posts drawing 
salaries under CASPs, the salary HoAs under CASPs w ill be enabled for estimates.   
VIII. Adequate budget provision to be made for RIDF schem es approved by the NABARD.  
  
7(C) Estimates for Works Expenditure :  
a. Government is bestowing focus on the infrastructure  sectors viz. connectivity, housing, 
drinking water, education, health, etc. which impro ves living standards of the people & 
facilitates speedy industrialization. To achieve th ese goals, the Capital Budget shall be 
prepared keeping in view the following. 
i. The proposals must be based on mission goals, mediu m term development 
objectives, and service delivery benchmarks.  
ii. Prioritization of financing options shall be Public -Private Partnership/ CASDS 
/ SDPs / EAP / NABARD / HUDCO etc. All the Chief En gineers are 
requested to give full information in the prescribe d online proforma.  
b. The information shall be submitted only for works w hich are sanctioned by the 
competent authority. No work shall be uploaded only  in anticipation of orders.  
c. The information connected furnished by Chief Engine ers/ Departments has to be verified 
and validated by the Director Works Accounts, AP.  
d. Strictly follow the instructions issued vide U.O.No te.No.(2569644) 
FMU0MISC/428/2024-FMU-R-B, Dated:27.09.2024. for ca ncellation/continuation of 
works already sanctioned, while proposing budget es timates for works.  
8.     Review of Ongoing schemes : There is an imperative need for scrutiny of the o ngoing 
schemes in terms of priority, cost, suitability & o utcomes. The schemes which have outlived 
their utility must be closed & the staff redeployed . Each ongoing schemes shall be examined & 
decision taken to (i) continue the scheme (ii) disc ontinue the scheme (iii) continue the scheme 
with lower allocation. 
  9.         Economy in expenditure : All the HoDs/ Estimating Officers are advised to analyze all 
non-salary items & identify & propose at least 20% saving in the B.E.2025-26.  
  
10.       Sub-Plan for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Mi nority Welfare and Backward 
Classes:  
Separate screen is developed for entering detail of  Sub plans and minority action plan. 
The Social Welfare/ Tribal Welfare Department/ BC W elfare Department / Minority Welfare 
Department, the Nodal agencies for SCSP, TSP, BC Su b-plans & Minority Action Plan 
respectively, shall review the projections and prop ose changes wherever necessary.  
  
11.       Gender Budget : The Gender Budget Statement, being published sinc e 2021- 22, aims to 
consolidate & analyze the overall budgetary resourc es that government allocates & spends on 
programs/schemes that benefit women, directly & ind irectly. All the Departments are required to 
submit the Gender Budget Statement in the prescribe d online format in two Categories viz. (i). 
schemes 100%targeted towards women & girl beneficia ries; (ii). schemes in which 30 to 99% 
allocations are towards women and girl beneficiarie s. The WCD&SC department, the nodal 
department for gender budget shall review the proje ctions and propose changes wherever 
necessary.  
  
12.       Child Budget : The Child Budget Statement, aims to consolidate &  analyze the overall 
budgetary resources that government allocates & spe nds on programs/schemes that benefit 
children (0-18 years). All the Departments are requ ired to submit the Child Budget Statement in 
the prescribed online format in two categories (i) schemes 100% targeted towards children (ii) 
Pro-child Schemes in which 30%-99% allocation towar ds children. The WCD&SC department, 
the nodal department for child budget shall review the projections and propose changes wherever 
necessary.  
  
13.       All Corporations/Societies/Boards, etc., shall furnish income & expenditure statements/ 
utilization certificates/audit period details/ date  of latest Board of Directors meeting & details of 
expenditure budget. The Corporations / Societies / Boards are hereby in structed to complete 
all compliances including audit of up-to last finan cial years accounts and place the reports 
before the Legislature before requesting for the bu dget support.  
  
14.       Disclosure Statements required under AP FRBM Rules 2006: As per rule 6(1) of 
APFRBM Rules, 2006, the State Government, at the ti me of presenting the Budget, make the 
following disclosures as required under Section 10 of the APFRBM Act, 2005.  
i. Form D-7 Statement of Assets – access is given to D DOs/HoDs  
ii. Form D-8 Tax Revenues raised but not realized – acc esses is given to HoDs of Revenue 
earning departments  
iii. Form D-9 Statement of Miscellaneous liabilities out standing – access is given to HoDs of 
Departments  
  
15.       All DDOs/HoDs shall compulsorily furnish the relevant information in prescribed online 
proforma along with the BE, as these statements hav e to be presented to the Legislature.    
16. Special Points: Following points are to be noted & followed by all the concerned:  
a. No provision should be made in the estimates for an y expenditure item for which the 
sanction has not been already accorded by the gover nment.  
b. Classification of expenditure as per standard objec t Heads: it is noticed that departments 
are not assessing fund requirement under standard o bject heads realistically or 
classification is not made under the specified obje ct class, resulting in avoidable re-
appropriation of funds or opening of new object hea ds to classify the expenditure. This 
shall be avoided.  
c. Committed Expenditure  viz., Subsidies, Maintenance, Social Security Pens ions etc., to 
be completely provided for. The departments to furn ish the detailed calculation sheet in 
support of their calculation with number of benefic iaries and unit cost etc., along with the 
estimates of 2025-26.  
d. Engagement of consultants/outsourcing/retired Gover nment staff:  strictly follow the 
guidelines issued in G.O.Ms.No.86, Finance (HR.I Pl g & Policy) Department, 
Dated:30.08.2024 for procurement of services from c onsultant agencies and individual 
consultants and make necessary provision after gett ing approval from the competent 
authority. 
e. Engagement of retired Government staff: Strictly follow the guidelines issued in 
G.O.Rt.No.1466, General Administration (Poll.C) Dep artment, Dated:22.08.2024 for re-
appointment of retired state government employees o n Contract / Outsourcing basis and 
make necessary provision after getting approval fro m the competent authority. 
f.  Engagement of outsourcing: new cases shall not be proposed. The continuation o f 
permitted staff shall be critically reviewed & numb er reduced. The information viz.name 
of project/scheme, duration of scheme, post categor y, number & remuneration permitted, 
& sanction order to be provided.  
g. 300-Other Contractual Services : Adequate provisions shall be made under this HoA.  
The relevant orders issued by the competent authori ty shall be provided. 
h. Object Head Salaries : shall be realistically estimated based on sanctio ned establishment 
strength & scales of pay.  
i. Establishment Charges:  shall be estimated based on average expenditure in curred 
during the past three years.  
j. CSS schemes:  shall provisioned as per the approved action plan.   
k. Non-recurring items (furniture, equipment, office p eripherals etc.,):  There is a ban 
on purchase of Furniture & Fixtures, hence make pro vision only after getting approval 
from the competent authority and should not be repe ated on basis of average expenditure, 
but as per actual requirement.   
l. Materials & Supplies, Machinery & Equipment, Drugs & Medicines: to be budgeted 
carefully, as there is tendency to overestimate.  
m. Pending Bills:  Full details to be collected and priority given fo r allocation of funds.  
n. Restructuring of existing schemes: Discontinuation/ Merger of schemes with annual 
outlay of Rs.5.00 crore or less to be examined & pr oposed. The schemes with similar 
objectives should be clubbed together to avoid over lapping. No new State scheme be 
formulated if similar objectives are covered under any Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  17.      Improper budgeting : In preparation of previous budgets, the following  is noticed. 
a. In certain cases, supplementary Demands of Grants w ere obtained for certain schemes, 
but the final expenditure incurred was less than th e Budget Estimates.  
b. In certain cases, re-appropriation of funds was mad e by the department, but even the 
original budget estimates were not fully utilised.  
c. In certain cases, the actual expenditure at the clo se of financial year was found either in 
excess or short of the budget provision.  
d. In certain cases, there is high variation between t he B.E. & Actuals.  
e. In certain cases, substantial amounts are surrender ed & additional funds sought for 
certain items not originally anticipated in the ver y 1st quarter of the financial year. 
f. In certain cases, a major portion of the entire B.E . is incurred within a couple of months 
& additional allotment is sought.  
  
All the above implies that the requirement of funds  not properly assessed & projected, 
which leads to improper budgeting & invites adverse  comments by Audit. Therefore, the 
estimates are to be prepared with due care, foretho ught, based on realistic requirement of funds.  
  
18.       Scrutiny of estimates by the Administrati ve Department of Secretariat: The Secretariat 
Departments are requested to scrutinise & forward t he estimates to Finance Department with 
their specific comments. The objective of scrutiny is to detect excessive/inadequate provision in 
R.E. & B.E, which the Secretariat are in a better p osition to do, in view of their more intimate 
knowledge of working of Departments under their adm inistrative control. The Departments are 
requested to send R.E. & B.E. proposals against eac h sub-detailed head.  
  
19.  The Secretariat Departments/ HoDs shall ensure  the submission of the relevant 
documents/orders in support of the budget estimates  proposed by them.  
  
20.       Online Submission of Estimates: The new s oftware ( https:// nidhi.apcfss.in ) is enabled 
& the link is provided in AP Finance Department por tal. The HoDs & the Estimating Officers 
should submit the estimates to the Secretariat Depa rtments concerned in https:// nidhi.apcfss.in 
by 21-01-2025 . The Secretariat Departments shall forward the est imates with their comments to 
the Finance Department latest by 24-01-2025 .  
 
(BY ORDER AND IN THE NAME OF THE GOVERNOR OF ANDHRA  PRADESH)  
  
          
PEEYUSH KUMAR  
          PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT  
 
 
To  
All the Departments of Secretariat.  
All Heads of Departments & Estimating Officers.  
The Registrar, Andhra Pradesh High Court Amaravati.  The Secretary to Governor, Raj Bhavan, Vijayawada.  
The Secretary, APPSC, Vijayawada.  
Copy to :  
All Officers in Finance Department.  
The Chief Executive Officer, APCFSS.  
PS to Hon’ble Chief Minister.  
OSD to Chief Secretary.  
OSD to Hon’ble Minister for Finance.  
PS to Prl. Secy/Secy. (Exp & HR) /Secy.(B&IF)/Addl. Secy (RM)/JS(C)/DS(C) 
All FMU sections in Finance Department.  
SF/SC 
 
//FORWARDED :: BY ORDER// 
 
SECTION OFFICER 